Preface


HAVING vindicated in my introductory chapter the practice of collecting
book-plates from the charge of flagrant immorality, I do not think it
necessary to spend many words in demonstrating that it is in every way a
worthy and reasonable pursuit, and one which fully deserves to be made
the subject of a special treatise in a series of _Books about Books_. If
need were, the Editor of the series, who asked me to write this little
hand-book, would perhaps kindly accept his share of responsibility, but
in the face of the existence of a flourishing 'Ex Libris' Society, the
importance of the book-plate as an object of collection may almost be
taken as axiomatic. My own interest in this particular hobby is of long
standing, and happily the appearance, when my manuscript was already at
the printer's, of Mr. Egerton Castle's pleasantly written and profusely
illustrated work on _English Book-Plates_ has relieved me of the dreaded
necessity of writing an additional chapter on those modern examples, in
treating of which neither my knowledge nor my enthusiasm would have
equalled his.

The desire to possess a book-plate of one's own is in itself commendable
enough, for in fixing the first copy into the first book the owner may
surely be assumed to have registered a vow that he or she at least will
not join the great army of book-persecutors--men and women who cannot
touch a volume without maltreating it, and who, though they are often
ready to describe the removal of a book-plate, even from a worthless
volume, as an act of vandalism, do infinitely more harm to books in
general by their ruthless handling of them. No doubt, also, the decay of
interest in heraldry, which is mainly responsible for the eccentricities
of modern 'fancy' examples, has taken from us the temptation to commit
certain sins which were at one time attractive. Our ancestors, for
instance, may sometimes have outraged the susceptibilities of the
heralds by using as book-plates coats-of-arms to which they had no
title. Yet their offence against the College of Arms was trivial when
compared with the outrage upon common-sense committed by the mystical
young man of to-day, who designs, or has designed for him, an
'emblematic' book-plate, or a 'symbolic' book-plate, or a 'theoretic'
book-plate, in which the emblem, or the symbol, or the theory, is far
too mystical for any ordinary comprehension, and needs, in fact, a
lengthy explanation, which, however, I am bound to confess, is always
very willingly given by either owner or designer, if asked for.